[Diffing two Rembrandt prints.](https://github.com/artsmia/ecce-homo/commit/67c7c2ede1a0af69a31ff58b65a893f9e0dfcd2b)

![animation of the 1653 and 1655 versions of Rembrandt's Ecce Homo](https://github.com/artsmia/ecce-homo/raw/master/ecce-homo.gif)

## [Ecce Homo, 1653](https://collections.artsmia.org/index.php?page=detail&id=9202)

> In 1655, the year after Rembrandt and his mistress Hendrickje Stoffels
fell into disgrace due to the harsh and unfair judgment at the hands of
church officials, Rembrandt returned to work on the copper printing
plate of his drypoint tour de force Ecce Homo, literally "Behold the
Man," the phrase spoken by Pontius Pilate when presenting Christ to the
crowd for judgement. Using a scraper, he set about the onerous task of
effacing the beautiful crowd scene that had animated the foreground. He
also retouched many of the figures remaining in the image, most
tellingly that of Christ, whom he transformed from the apparition of the
Holy Ghost to sinew and bone, a very physical man. He replaced the
ground upon which the crowd had stood with a pit, a bottomless opening
leading to hell. Now we stand on one side, Christ on the other, and we
viewers become the crowd that must answer Pilate's entreaty to choose
between Christ and Barrabas. Rembrandt's highly structured composition
imparts a sense of inevitability to the decision. The artist's sorrow
for all involved seems to be reflected in his inclusion of a melancholic
river god who mourns the event. This heartbreaking image is the
culmination of a series of interpretations of the biblical story, a
series begun by Holland's greatest renaissance artist, Lucas van Leyden,
Who inspired Rembrandt's first version of the scene.  

## [Ecce Homo, 1655](https://collections.artsmia.org/index.php?page=detail&id=115357)

> Early in his career, Rembrandt produced a large print of this subject
with a decidedly more baroque composition (on view nearby). Here he
rethought the image to contend with the Renaissance ideas of Raphael
and his own countryman, Lucas van Leyden. The composition, given
structure by the rectilinear massing of the classical architecture, is
calm and stable, except for the jeering crowd. Christ is so sparely
depicted that he appears almost as the Holy Ghost.

> Rembrandt took pains to perfect the image. The fine brown pen lines in
the crowd may reveal his efforts to adjust the lighting before
committing to making changes in the copper plate. Eventually, after the
harsh judgment meted out to him and Hendrickje, he chose the radical
solution of effacing the crowd, causing the viewer to have to choose
between Christ and the insurgent Barabbas.  
